[Music]
power is control over other people and
empowered means that
you're not looking for control of others
you're just being you despite the
consequences
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
[Music]
the accumulation of power seems like a
good idea at first then we see how
deeply insecure some billionaires and
leaders of countries can be what if no
amount of power could ever make you feel
safe what if it was just another thing
that could be taken away from you and
what if being empowered is the key to
the only security that truly sets you
free
Joe what makes this distinction so
important yeah the empowered overpowered
distinction I think there's a deep
confusion in us as as a people and
internally between the two and that
confusion is what creates the
subjugation that we feel both in the
relationship to ourselves and
um the relationship with the outside
world
And to clarify that confusion to
actually see that we are
always a choice
and that choice is always empowered
whether we want to admit it or not is a
way to set us free from that subjugation
so power is real there are there are
people who really do have power over us
and there are there are situations in
which we have limited control so that
must be partially responsible for a
situation
yes and no the the thing is is that
we're all interdependent everything is
interdependent you know it's like a
gigantic machine if you will or a
gigantic ecosystem and so who has the
power the the ants or the mountain lion
or the rabbits
and if any of them go the whole system
changes right so the whole system is
dependent on all the other parts of the
system and in that way yes there are
things that have power over us right if
you're a deer deer techs have power over
you and mountain lions have power over
you but if you're a mountain lion deer
have power over you because if the deer
disappear you're screwed you're not
eaten so there's a way of looking at it
that says oh wow everything that I'm
interdependent on has power over me and
you can look at it that way and it's
absolutely true
the other way to look at it is that
our choice is ours we get to choose we
might not like the consequences like we
don't always have control over the
consequences and I think when we don't
have control over the consequences
that's when the Mind wants to say oh
somebody has power over me but there's
nobody on this planet that isn't
that isn't dependent on somebody else or
something else so
you know take the most powerful person
in the world if people stop buying their
product or if people rebel against them
or if
the price of oil goes to twenty dollars
a barrel and all of a sudden their money
to control the their society goes away
everybody has something like that you
know it's something that I think about
oftentimes when I'm thinking about CEOs
and my experience in working with them
is that they have more bosses than
anybody they have their and key
employees who they need to keep happy
their customers they need to keep happy
they're shareholders they need to keep
happy they're board of directors they
need to keep happy there's so many
people who they are
dependent on or they need their approval
or they need them to buy into their
Vision in some way
and so
there's nobody in the system that isn't
dependent on other people and there's
nobody in this system that isn't scared
to
change the system because of
consequences right so
just as one person is sitting there and
saying hey if I stand up for myself I'll
lose my job there's a CEO that says hey
if I don't give my quarterly numbers
I'll lose my job if I don't get to the
quarterly numbers I'll lose my job
and there's a billionaire that's like
wow if I don't
keep on
finding more oil I'm going to lose my my
fortune you know there's just something
everywhere everybody's got something and
so in that aspect absolutely everybody
has somebody who has power over them
right I think we often think about the
people who Diversified you mean like
lots of customers or lots of people as
more powerful meaning that they're not
they're not dependent on one person
they're not dependent on One customer
they feel more powerful in our system
but everybody's dependent so it sounds
like kind of what you're pointing at in
terms of power when something has power
over us it's setting the constraints of
our environment and if we have power
over someone else we have the power to
set the constraints for the system
in some way but that doesn't tell the
whole story
um there's there's what we do within the
constraints and which constraints we buy
into or don't that's it yeah so inside
of the constraints you're completely
empowered and the way that you show up
inside the constraints the constraints
have to adjust meaning if you are scared
of losing your job and you say forget it
I'm going to show up
the way that feels right for me and if I
get fired I get fired you will change
the system there's no way for it not to
change even if you get fired there's no
way for the system not to change right
because there's no way that the way you
interact with the system doesn't affect
it
yeah even the the structure of a company
or even the the interpersonal relations
in your team will change if you're not
being a the same Cog in the ecosystem
that was existing before
that's right and you see this you know
working with CEOs and working with
billionaires you see this all the time
that there's a whole bunch of things
that they want to affect change on that
they can't they don't know how to or
they that nobody knows how to or it's
just beyond their control
it's not like anybody in any situation
doesn't have something that they are not
able to affect the change on right
there's billionaires that I know that if
they could control everything they would
have more billions and there's
billionaires I know that if they could
control everything you know everybody
would have social and economic equality
but they can't
just like we can't you can't I can't
nobody can
as long as you need to control a
situation
to feel empowered
then you are subjugated yeah that's not
real empowerment that's right so where
does this come from where does this this
yearning for power
arise from if not empowerment fear
if we're making the distinction between
power and empowered
you know and and I think that even in
our language oftentimes when someone
says I feel powerful
they might they mean empowered right and
and as far as the semantics we're going
to use that means empowered and then
some people are like I feel powerful
meaning I have control over you and so
people who want to feel power control
over situations just fear they just are
scared on some level we all are scared
when we are when we are looking to find
power now power might come to us and
just because I have power doesn't mean
I'm scared but if I'm looking for it
then I'm scared and then how does how
does achieving achieving some sense of
power actually satiate or affect that
fear or does it
it doesn't you know it's it's like any
addiction there's a um short-term high
that you get and then it's over I
remember when I was I was I was in like
the one of my poorest times in my life
when I had the least amount of resources
and my attitude towards money and power
was just changing and I was driving in
my car
and I was thinking oh I don't have
enough
and as it turned out at that time I knew
several billionaires
and I kind of went through the list and
I'm like oh you know they're driving
around right now thinking they don't
have enough either
I'm like oh I'm a billionaire
my situation their situation is no
different
like yeah they can affect some change in
a way that I can't but I can affect some
change in the way that they can't like I
could imagine a situation where a
billionaire even feels more powerless
because they realize they have all this
money and they're actually not able to
change the world so they don't get yeah
they don't get to believe that money
would solve that problem for them that's
right yeah that's the thing is like one
of um the best investors I ever met said
that if you see somebody who thinks that
money's going to solve their problems
don't invest and and they're dead right
capitalization doesn't solve problems it
just makes them bigger often yeah
problems and you end up with bigger
problems that require money to sustain
yes that's right
yeah so it's like this illusion
once you have the power then you got to
worry about holding on to it you know
it's an another billionaire guy told me
at one point he said um everybody works
Joe
everybody works
you know there if you have a billion
dollars you gotta work to maintain it
everybody works or even if you're if
you're going for Social Capital you have
the billion dollars like you still have
to work to maintain social capital and
connections and
right yeah or you've got you know 54
billion dollars and you can't affect an
election
right one guy with maybe a billion
dollars can beat another guy with
54 billion who can both of them can be
beaten with somebody with like less than
a million
powers and accumulated by more power
it makes it easier in some level in some
forms of power but sometimes having
large amounts of power actually make it
harder to accumulate power like in the
in the current election cycle trying to
get elected as a billionaire like takes
you down a whole bunch of notches
already right or
being a really big shot investor with a
lot of power on some level there's some
benefits to it and on other levels a lot
of people follow you which makes it
creates complications as far as like
liquidity and other things it's the same
thing with somebody who has the power of
leadership in a small community
on one level there are certain things
that they can affect change around that
other people can't
and in another level there are certain
things they can't you know there's a
certain balance that is struck in in any
leadership position and some things can
be taken away from you more readily and
some things you can't affect change on
and it's something that I realized when
I was in Boards of directors that
sometimes in certain Boards of directors
I have more power being off the board
than I did being on the board
hmm because being on the board I was
part of the dynamic and I couldn't help
the leadership see through the dynamic
and my capacity to help people see
through the dynamic was more powerful
than having a vote right having the
Unseen hand behind the curtain kind of
thing you know is it like the way that I
Define power is that power is
is a thing that can be taken away from
you
empowerment can't be taken away from you
power is control over other people and
empowered means that
you're not looking for control of others
you're just being
you despite the consequences
power is looking to find safety it's an
it's an expression of fear
empowered is standing in the face of
that fear and being truthful to yourself
and if you think about like every story
that we've ever heard it's always the
story of the person
who goes against
the consequences for their truth this is
what we long for in ourselves is that
I'm going to be empowered in a way that
I will do the right thing despite the
consequences whether I'm saving somebody
from a burning building or whether I'm
risking my job to be authentic
that's what empowered is yeah the
burning building was a good example
because like running into a burning
building to save somebody the fire has
power over you there's nothing anybody's
going to do to change that but you are
going into the burning building to do
your truth to try to save you know
somebody
and regardless of the consequences and
you're willing to experience and
feel the consequences of coming up
against something with much greater
power than you yeah that's right and
there's this there's the kind of the
material power like a money or gun or
fire and then there's also just kind of
the power of influence over you or other
people and what what I notice is that
when people act empowered
eight times out of ten maybe seven times
out of ten
the consequence that they're scared of
doesn't come to pass even though the
moment before they take that action
they're pretty sure it's like inevitable
right you know if I'm saying I'm going
to be true to my wife even though I
might lose her
eight times out of ten I'm not gonna
lose her
if I'm saying I'm going to be true to
myself even if I might get fired 8 out
of 10 times I don't get fired right fire
you know if you're actually going into a
burning building I don't know what the
odds are you know it's not something
that I have enough experience I will say
the the other part of that is that even
when you act empowered and things don't
go the way you want them to go they end
up going the way you want them to go
eventually meaning yes maybe your wife
leaves you but eventually you get in a
relationship that works for you meaning
that as you act empowered as you act in
your truth the world that can handle
your truth surrounds you and that
becomes your reality bubble
right we're all in these Echo Chambers
you know if I believe one political
thing I'm gonna be in an echo chamber of
verification of that
if I believe something else I'll be in
an echo chamber that verifies that it's
how our Consciousness works and if we're
true to ourselves we end up in an echo
chamber that is true to ourselves right
and it seems there's like a difference
between the actual constraints that our
environment places on us and then the
predicted constraints that we are
simulating that we are that we're
actually acting on which are not exactly
the real constraints of the environment
and if we start operating in a way that
don't fit the constraints of our
immediate environment we may end up
losing the partnership we may end up
losing the job but if we stick with the
operating as though the world had the
constraints that we want eventually we
will only end up fitting into a system
that fits those constraints that's right
and and you see this
in great leadership right so so I would
say that one of the ways that you know
that you're empowered is that you're
acting in a way as if your reality is
already true that your vision is already
true
so if you're a civil rights leader
you're acting as if you are already
equal and free
and you're you're showing you're being
that example for everybody to follow and
you're assuming that everybody will
treat you that way and it starts bending
the world into that way of treating you
and if you feel like you're less than
than your Civil Rights Movement
by its nature will have more friction in
it more people will treat you as you're
less than
and it's the same with anything whether
it's like if you're acting as a leader
of a CEO and you're like of course we're
going to be successful and you're acting
like you're successful when you're in
the negotiations you're acting like
you're successful
then the world wants to bend towards
that it doesn't mean it bends towards it
all the time but it wants to bend
towards that so that's what being a
Visionary is and that is if you're
empowered then that visionary
nature starts becoming more and more
obvious too it just becomes something
that starts happening so that brings up
an interesting subtlety the idea of
acting as though you're already
successful it seems like there there
could be ways of Performing success that
are not beneficial
but like the actual belief that you are
successful how would you distinguish
between those two things
uh the way I would distinguish between
those two things is that there is
um there's a great story of it was an
admiral in the Navy who got into A POW
Camp in Vietnam and he was asked
who made it who didn't make it he said
well who didn't make it was easy that
was The Optimist
and the interviewer is like what do you
mean Optimist and he said um means that
they thought they were going to get out
by Christmas or by you know the next
season or whatever it was they didn't
make it because when that came and that
timetable came and left
they became defeated in it and they they
didn't make it
they said well who did make it he said
well that's clear as the people who
thought that they would get out
the people who maintained that vision of
Their Own
Freedom right so in that sense like the
the people that are performing if we
find ourselves performing successfulness
um and then like signs of failure come
then that can just completely break down
and we'll actually just believe we're a
failure and that'll be the end whereas
realizing that this business can
entirely fail and I still feel empowered
as a successful
you know as as the person who can be
successful
correct and will be you know it might be
the next business right
yeah and you see this all the time when
people are transforming when they're
changing they have this massive
breakthrough
and then they go
oh then they feel disempowered because
of the power of the of the pattern
and they're like how do I keep it how do
I keep this breakthrough
and as soon as you see that as soon as
you see somebody start wrestling with
how do I keep it you know that it's
going to be in flux you know that it's
gonna
pendulate back and forth for a while
but when the person sees it so clearly
that they're like of course this is
what's happening
then it's over even if it comes back a
little bit it's over like the the whole
process is quicker
so if somebody's like been
getting angry a ton in their world and
then all of a sudden they have this
breakthrough of like oh my gosh it's not
that I'm angry it's that I'm hurt and
they start crying and they see this this
new reality and they're like yeah of
course they don't need to hold on to it
then you know that that change is going
to be smooth and and quick
and if they are like oh my God I see it
how do I keep it
and you know that then they're not fully
empowered yeah there's a belief that's
fragile then and that they don't really
have exactly and in that belief system
they still feel like this thing has
power over them
right this influence and what's
interesting is
of course it has power over you you know
of course and and it's exactly that that
you need to enter into it's exactly
that helplessness that helps us become
empowered so what I mean by that
specifically because that can be
incredibly confusing is that the feeling
of helplessness
going through the feeling of
helplessness is what creates oftentimes
that sense of empowerment yeah that's
important because what you're just
saying earlier is that the power itself
or the seeking of power is a deep
expression of fear
and it seems like that would be the fear
of feeling the helplessness the fear of
being helpless if you just move through
that helplessness then you end up on the
other side
feeling empowered that's it you just
said it better than I could
so is there anything else you want to
add to the definition of empowered
empowered really is a feeling it's a
state
it's not
um a life condition meaning you can be a
billionaire and feel empowered and you
can be in poverty and feel empowered
it's not really about how many resources
you have it's about your resourcefulness
it's knowing that you have the courage
to do what's true for you and the other
thing about empoweredness is that
you can't really love without it
like if you look at all the people who
we see as beacons of Love there is a
deep sense of empowerment to them
and if you close your eyes and you go
inside and you feel what it is to be
unconditionally loving
and then you feel what it is to be
unconditionally empowered
you'll notice that they're
two sides of the same Mountain
and the peak you can't get to the peak
without both sides of the mountain
so I'm curious about what are some of
the some of the different ways that we
allow ourselves to have power taken over
us like what are what are some of the
types of power there can be like
economic power there could be emotional
power
um and I think a lot of this could
allude to the victim's savior bully
stuff that we've discussed in some of
the other episodes
so when we're in fear which is often
when we're seeking power over another
person we're often in a victim savior or
a bully role
and so that is a good sign that you're
in the power over
and you can have power over somebody by
being a bully that that won't we know
really well our society agrees with that
one they're like oh yeah that person's a
bully they want power over but you can
get power over people as a victim too so
I was watching a television show about
magic and for whatever reason they had
this group of moms and they were all
talking about you know guilt and they
were all laughing and smiling over how
guilt was a good way to control their
kids
and it's like right that is how people
can control through the victim like I'm
so fragile that you can't tell me your
truth if you if there's somebody in your
life that you can't tell your truth to
because you're scared of hurting them
then you're being somebody is
controlling through victimhood
and it's the same way with a savior you
can control people by saving them right
you see this in very wealthy families
all the time
they maintain control over their
children by making sure that their money
is there to save them or the or the
Al-Anon saving the alcoholic it's it
happens all the time so there's all
sorts of ways in which we are
trying to have power over people and
they mostly fit into three categories
which is victim Savior and Bully the uh
the example with like the the rich
people with the money doing the Savior
thing I think that there's many many
ways that that could apply to
philanthropy as well yeah absolutely um
philanthropy can be done in a way that
is entirely disempowering and that can
be done in a way that is empowering and
I think a lot of that would come from
I come from the mindset of the people
involved on all sides of it in the
system that's right yeah so when I did a
lot of philanthropy with schools and
with kids I would stay away from working
with anybody who's coming from a place
of guilt that they were doing it because
they felt guilty because their
philanthropy just didn't work
um and if they were trying to help
people I would also stay away from it
but if they were working with people
so that both they and the people they
were there to serve were being helped
then those were effective what's an
example of how that would work
philanthropy failing because it came
from a place of guilt oh
I was in Nicaragua at one point and
there was a group of Canadians there
that were that brought a whole bunch of
clothing for the for this Village
and they all felt really great about
themselves and you know when I asked
them why they did it they were all like
oh I just feel bad that we have so much
and I wanted to spread it and it you
know it's it's there's nothing wrong
with it but it just isn't successful and
I remember sitting with them and saying
hey you know there's all these Turtles
here that are going extinct and all
these people
could be saving the turtles what what if
they earned the clothing
by helping the turtles how does that
change this whole system
and what it does change is it makes
people have an equal exchange and so
they feel empowered and
if somebody's just giving them stuff
without an exchange then it is actually
quite disempowering because now you have
power over them because they need you to
give them stuff
so you see that you saw like in the 70s
in Africa you saw where like food drops
would happen and then when the people
who had the walkie-talkies that helped
the food drops happen went away
the native people like tried to build
fake walkie-talkies and act like the
person with the walkie-talkies to get
the food to drop it's like you're not
teaching the person how to fish
you're giving them fish and and that's
usually how the
when people act out of guilt that's
usually how it works because they feel
like they have to give
and good philanthropy is an exchange
it's not a gift
it's a recognition that you're getting
as much from it as you're giving that
sideways to another another interesting
thing from kind of earlier in the
conversation about your empowerment is
something that you have to give up like
you choose to give up your empowerment
yeah and let's let's talk a little bit
more about that so there's a choice that
you make and every time that you feel
like you're been disempowered or that
someone has power over you and you can't
be true to yourself
than what's actually happening is that
you are choosing to avoid a
a potential bad consequence
and that's a choice that you're making
so you have to choose that for it to be
the case Mandela had everything taken
from him except his life
he was crushing rocks he was beaten it
was not pretty for for him and yet he
stayed empowered
he continued to make choices and knew
the choices that he was making
despite the consequences
how does that work in uh in daily life
like with a with a job or you know with
perhaps with a receiver of philanthropy
um try and try to become empowered but
finding that the moment they become
empowered they stop receiving you know
gifts
and so it's easier not to it's true yeah
it's really true it's harder to raise
money for something that's deeply
empowered too it's interesting that way
but then again the people who truly feel
empowered don't need to raise as much
money they have other ways of making
things happen yeah it's a good question
how does it happen in daily life one of
the ways that I work with my clients on
this often that makes it really acute is
like and I mentioned it a bit in the
beginning but I'll use a different
example it's like a husband that's
deeply unhappy in this marriage
and I'll ask the question well what if
you act exactly how you want to act and
see if they leave you see if the divorce
occurs
that's an empowered act it's like oh I'm
not going to compromise my authenticity
my truth
to keep your love
I'm not going to compromise my
authenticity and my truth to keep the
job
I'm not gonna compromise my authenticity
and my truth to avoid the conflict
and that's when people feel disempowered
is when they don't make that choice and
that's when people complain about
somebody having power over them right
like believing that we're not going to
be able to find another job if we leave
this job or like believing we're never
going to find another partner of
if things don't work out with this one
and we don't conform to this
structure we're in right yeah and then
that that becomes
pretty obvious pretty quickly when
you're dealing with like one-on-one
relationships but then when it comes to
like being in a company or being in a
country or being part of a geopolitical
system it becomes a little bit harder to
see because
your the change that you're creating is
just less palpable it's because you're
it you know it's a numbers game
and so it becomes harder for people to
see in that way but it that's an
intellectual thing on an emotional and a
gut level you feel it right away you
know it right away
when you are acting empowered
in those situations say oh I'm I'm going
to be this way and and I see it
all the time you know it's like if you
look at the people who are breaking the
social norms in a way that is liberating
for them that are the Front Runners or
the Trailblazers if you look at those
folks
they are the ones who are not buying
into the consequences and it's
contagious then like if you're if you're
looking for a social change
um you know it requires empowerment on a
population level
and it might feel from a disempowered
place that if you're the only person who
becomes empowered you're just going to
get steamrolled by the system
and yet you look at examples like MLK
and it's one person was empowered enough
to have like a halo around them creating
more empowerment and he died
right so there was somebody who had a
gun and that's real power
and it affected change
and
he had real power and it affected change
and both of the the man who shot and the
man who got shot in this particular case
both affected massive change in the
world
the difference between the two is one
felt empowered and one felt disempowered
and so the change that we affect when we
feel disempowered
usually doesn't serve ourselves or
Humanity hmm so yeah that that reminds
me of like the uh the archetype of the
Rebel somebody who feeling what they
think is power uh ends up destroying
their life and others in the name of
their truth you know whoever shot MLK
was
felt like they were following their
truth and um you see this all the time
let's talk about that yeah
it's really hard to see the difference
sometimes especially when you're in the
middle of it and it's subtle until you
see it and when you see it it's clear
if you are in blame for another person
or shame for yourself
then you are disempowered
and you are trying to accumulate power
if you are not in blame or for others or
shame for yourself then that is
empowered
that's the emotional way to know where
you're at
or guilt I guess guilt and shame can be
distinct distinguished as well a little
bit yes guilt and shame we'll put them
together those are such
semantically that's a very interesting
thing and it's very culturally based but
yes guilt shame blame all that stuff is
the good indicator that you're
disempowered so earlier we were talking
about the drama triangle with a bully
and the victim and the Savior and um how
that's based in fear can you relate that
to blame and shame so oftentimes that
fear is based on the sense of
helplessness and that sense of
helplessness is because we believe the
story of blame and shame in our head
when you feel like someone else is
making your life X Y and Z way then
you're in blame and there's a
helplessness
and there's a fear that you will lose
complete control and therefore you need
to have control over
or there's a shame like I'm inherently
bad
and there's no way out of that it's a
deep feeling of helplessness and we're
scared of feeling that helplessness so
we then move into the drama triangle or
the fear triangle
so that's how it works it's that
helplessness
is the feeling of that blame and shame
felt all the way through that we don't
want to feel
and that's the amazing thing about
feeling helplessness feeling
helplessness doesn't make you more
helpless feeling helpless makes you more
capable and it's so counter-intuitive
but if you do it you know it right
because so much of our decision-making
process is based on trying to avoid an
emotional state the emotional state of
helplessness is one of the ones
underlying most
of our avoidance
all right so what are what are some of
the indicators for each of these
particular roles if all of them are fear
state kind of being set into place with
blame and shame and we need to feel
helplessness to get through them what
are some of the indicators for some of
these particular roles of victim bully
and savior the reason I don't call the
drama triangle very often and I'm more
prone to call it the fair triangle is
because the
victim bullying savior correspond with
fight flight or freeze which are the
states of fear and fight is pretty
obviously bully right it's like when I'm
scared I fight
when I'm scared I freeze that's more
victim and when I'm scared I I fly
that's Savior and it that's the harder
one to understand but what happens is I
run away from myself and my own
experience and I try to fix you so that
I can feel safe
if I can make it so you don't get drunk
I'll feel safe I if I can make it that
you are happy then I'll feel safe and so
I'm running away from myself going into
you to try to fix my issues and so
that's why I called the fear triangle
and there's a feeling for each one of
them right that is kind of the indicator
and the indicator is if I am feeling all
alone in it that's the bully and if I
feel obligation that's the Savior and if
I feel stuck that's the victim
and in actuality we'll feel all three of
these things if you really slow it down
for a minute and you'll notice that
you'll you'll feel all three of these
things in a moment of fear
you know I my wife comes home she's in a
horrible mood and I feel helpless that
now my mood is going to be screwed up
and
the house is going to be screwed up and
you know the kids are going to be
screwing like I can't do anything
I might feel alone like oh God I can't
do I'm I'm the only one who has to fix
this thing and then I feel
oh my God I got to do something for her
so that she feels better and then I'm
like I'm stuck with this thing you know
it's like all three of them can happen
slowly or quickly
but there's one that usually we dominate
in situations that are dominating Us in
situations right most people tend
towards fight flight or freeze most of
the time
yeah I personally tend towards the the
savior
yeah I have tended towards
um both Savior and Bully those are the
two places I'll go depending on the
circumstance
hmm yeah and often in quick succession
right
let's talk a little bit more about how
this works in companies and in teams so
it works in a number of ways the first
is you see this happening all the time
in
in companies and teams is that
somebody's acting like the victim or
some group is acting like the victim so
I'm acting as the Savior there's
different ways that they're trying to
create control the the less empowered
the team feels the more drama
and that's a great like as soon as you
walk into a team if it's super political
it's just like well everybody feels
disempowered you just know it and if
somebody where everybody feels empowered
and they feel like they can affect
change there's so little politics that
are going on so it's a great it's a
great litmus test right because politics
is that control mechanism correct yeah
it's that fear right drama right and
that and that's the thing that you see
in a politics everywhere you know and I
don't mean politics isn't
people running countries I mean politics
it might be able to be political being
political right it's a deep expression
of fear
and people trying to capture power and
it's because everybody feels helpless
and feels like they're not actually able
to affect change in a way that that's
meaningful so how do you affect this
kind of change in a company whether
you're whether you're leading the
company or you're within the company
or you know at the bottom of some ladder
well this is the tricky bit right
because as a leader of a company you
want your people to be empowered
uh and you also often out of fear want
to limit their
um capacity to affect change
right I don't want uh the male the new
mail clerk to decide
you know what my initial public offering
price is going to be
so it's this constant balance of people
feeling empowered you wanting people to
feel empowered and at the same time
a fear of having that power kind of run
away or this lack of control and this is
the balance and the and the subtle War
that's happening often time with leaders
and you'll hear it all the time because
they'll say something like I wish
everybody would act like the owner of
the company
and they mean that to a point meaning
they want everyone to take
responsibility like that but they don't
want everybody to have all the benefits
and they don't want everybody to have
all the the choice that they have so
it's this very interesting
balance that happens
and what you see is if the what's
happening in those companies is that the
empowerment and
the roles have gotten confused so
if everybody can feel empowered in their
role
and their role is defined and how
decisions are made is defined then
people feeling deeply empowered is
incredibly good for a company and as
soon as those roles aren't defined well
as soon as
people don't know what they have to do
to be successful then
a whole bunch of empowered people just
creates a lot of a lot of mess so it
sounds like there's a bit of a like a
paradox here where you know having
having well-defined roles and
well-defined processes is structure and
that could be something that people feel
has power over them but then also what
you want is them to feel empowered to
push back and change that structure
or work fully within the structure and
also perhaps challenge it but if you if
you don't have structure like uh like
clear goals
criteria for Success loving
accountability
transparency then what happens there
there's a powerlessness in
in having no structure that's right yeah
so if there's no way to affect change or
make decisions then what you'll have is
this crazy politics with people trying
to get power so that they can feel safe
so yes you want to have some sort of
structure that allows itself to change
and as structure that doesn't change
without very specific things happening
so that people can feel safe that they
know what to do that they know what
success means
and this doesn't matter if it's
a A or
Enron right so in a a it's like there's
a very particular structure
that has to happen there's 12 steps and
there's the way that the meetings get
run and that structure
happens and and it's important or people
can't feel safe in those environments
in Uber there's very particular
structures in place there's I'm going to
rate you five stars or not I and there's
another structure of making sure that
drivers don't rip other people off by
tracking them on maps those structures
are really incredible incredibly
critical or people don't feel safe
will those structures need to change
over time absolutely
but you need the structure for people to
feel safe
and know what their roles are and there
needs to be you need to be able to make
room for people to grow and change their
roles
the Constitution the United States does
a pretty good job of it too
yes that's a so sure yeah
and so that's the balance that you're
constantly looking for is like how do I
create the amount of structure that
makes people feel safe but also gives
them autonomy and gives them the
capacity to feel as empowered as
possible and includes mechanisms for
that structure itself to be updated to
match reality absolutely absolutely
right that's it and so that's that's how
looking at companies and and what you
see typically is the more transparency
and the less structure that creates
safety like the more elegant the
structure is it creates safety
than the more successful the company
so taxi cabs becoming Uber is an example
of this less structure less
infrastructure
but creates actually more safety is the
same thing that happened with like GM
and Toyota like Toyota created
became more decentralized
than GM which was at the time the most
centralized company so that
decentralization but still maintaining
the structure is what usually gives
those companies a competitive advantage
and the reason is because it creates
more empowerment with the employees
seems like this would also promote
scalability for a company because if you
have 100 100 empowered decision makers
instead of three
done more decisions can be made and more
information can be processed that's
exactly right yeah and so you saw that
there's a I can't remember it was one of
the Malcolm Gladwell books talked about
how in this war game that the Pentagon
does that like this small band of
people beat the US Army because their
decision making was happening at the
bottom but there was some set of
principles some set of structure that
they could all operate within and that's
that's basically how you do it it was in
David and Goliath was I think his book
and and so you see that all the time and
you see it in in business books as well
like um Reinventing organizations where
this same kind of principle is there
another war game example when just War
example would be uh when Rommel first
encountered U.S troops in Northern
Africa he was like oh wow these guys are
totally green and completely
disorganized it'll be a cinch and then
not long after he was writing letters
back to Germany like wait don't
underestimate these people you can cut
off an entire unit from their command
and somehow they'll still figure out how
to fight but this isn't just an external
thing this is an internal thing as well
when you become more empowered you start
operating on a sense of a set of
principles and that set of principles
you're going to operate on whether it's
comfortable or not
so if I have a principle that basically
says I am not going to work with
and somebody says here's a billion
dollars to work with an I'm
going to say no
it's a set of principles I'm not going
to operate any differently than that if
I
have a set of principles and it's like
I'm going to be transparent with people
and tell them my truth despite the
consequences that's my set of principles
I'm going to do it no matter what and
that's when all the drama in me starts
disappearing right and that's when I
feel empowered is I've given myself a
structure that it doesn't change very
readily
you know it takes some time to change
that set of principles but I'm going to
operate in that way no matter what
and that helps me feel deeply empowered
which is strange right it's like a set
of criteria that I live by that actually
makes me feel empowered yeah as though
the this entire process of inquiry into
values is to create a more and more
Consolidated elegant structure by which
we live our lives so that we don't have
to think
about the complicated consequences and
how the consequences are going to play
out of what if I say this to my boss or
speak my truth here or leave this job
it's just this is simply how I want to
live and that's I'll accept the
consequences if if that's what it takes
that's exactly right yeah and so that
set of principles is what frees us and
if you look around at the people who you
just are like holy crap they had
they didn't have resources but they were
empowered and they changed the world
it's something else all of in common
they were living by a set of principles
internally and externally not perfectly
obviously we're
humans were not made perfect but it's
you know generally how how one lives
their life and when you see somebody
who's living by a set of principles
you'll also notice that they never are
blaming other folks that they're never
feeling like they're never worried about
somebody's power over them they're
addressing it and that also will affect
your opportunities as well like when I'm
when I'm hiring I'm much more interested
in the resourcefulness
um and the the ownership
like the self-ownership of the person
rather than you know the skills listed
on their resume
and people people really detect that in
any other any counterpart that they
might work with
that's right I'd rather pick the right
mentality than the right skill set for
sure I I'd obviously like to pick both
when I can
but yeah that's that's right
so this is what happens internally as
like I said as well as externally the
drama internally goes away
when we
feel empowered internally when we don't
feel like the
that we will make the choice even if
it's uncomfortable
so even if I have to feel helpless I'm
going to make that choice even if I have
to
I'm not gonna have power over somebody
else or try to have power over myself I
will rather feel the discomfort of the
fear and the helplessness I'll rather
enter into the shame
I would rather allow my own destruction
as far as the destruction of my identity
my identity as one who's put upon or my
identity is one who's valuable
I'd rather allow that to be destroyed
rather than move into fear
and act from fear and try to have
control over somebody
so it's an internal and an external
thing and when it's when you figure it
out internally you have no choice but to
act it externally
so if you feel like you are
subjugated by something externally then
you also feel like you're subjugated by
something internally well that sounds
like a great point to wrap this up on
thank you very much Joe yeah pleasure
Brett thank you very much
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
foreign